As we mentioned in the last lesson, there
is no single irricuteous solution for
big data problems.
So in this lesson,
our goal will be to explore some existing
solutions in a little more depth.
So after this lesson, you'll be able to.
Explain the at least five
desirable characteristics of
a Big Data Management System,
explain the differences between acid and
base, and
list examples of BDMSs and describe some
of their similarities and differences.
So we start from high level, suppose there
were an ideal big data management system.
What capabilities or
features should such a system have?
Professor Michael Carey of
the University of California Irvine
has described a number of characteristics.
We'll go through them and
use them as an idealistic yardstick
against which we compare
existing solutions.
First, the ideal BDMS would allow for
a semi-structured data model.
Now that does not mean it will only
support a specific format like XML.
The operative word here is flexible.
The flexibility can take many forms,
one of which Is the degree to which
schemas should be supported by the system.
In a perfect world, it should support
a completely traditional application which
requires the development of a schema.
At the same time, it should also support
applications which require no schema,
because the data can vary in terms
of its attributes and relationships.
A different axis of flexibility
is in the data types it supports.
For example, it should support
operations on text and documents.
It should also permit social media and
other data that have a time component and
need temporal operations, like before,
after, during, and so on.
Similarly, it should
allow spacial data and
allow operations like find all data
within a five mile radius of a landmark.
As we saw in a previous lesson,
a big advantage of a DBMS is that
is provides a query language.
There is a notion that query languages
present a steep learning curve for
data science people with no
background in computer science.
However, to effectively
manage large volumes of data,
it's often more convenient
to use a query language and
let the query processor automatically
determine optimal ways to receive data.
Now this query language may or
may not look like SQL,
which is the standard query language used
by the modern relational systems, but
it should at least be equally powerful.
Now this is not an unreasonable feature
given that most DBMS vendors offer their
own extension of SQL Of course it's not
enough to just have a good query language.
Today's big data systems must
have a parallel query engine
which will run on multiple machines.
The machines can be connected to
a shared nothing architecture, or
shared memory architecture,
or a shared cluster.
The shared nothing means two machines
do not share a disk or memory.
But this is a critical requirement for
any BDMS regardless of how complete
the supported query languages is for
efficiency sake Continuing with our list,
the next
capability of a BDMS is often
not emphasized as much as it should be.
Some applications working on top
of a BDMS will issue queries
which will only have a few conditions and
a few small objects to return.
But some applications, especially those
generated by other software tools or
machine learning algorithms can
have many many conditions and
can return many large objects.
In my own work, we have seen how internet
bots can blast an information system
with really large queries that
can potentially choke the system.
But that should not happen in a BDMS.
Now, we discussed streaming
data in a previous lesson.
In many cases,
a BDMS will have both streaming data,
which adds to the volume,
as well as to the large data that
need to be combined with the streaming
data to solve a problem.
An example would be to combine
streaming data from weather stations
with historical data to make
better predictions for wild fire.
We have discussed the definition,
significance and
importance of scalability before.
However, what a BDMS needs to guarantee
that it is designed to operate over a
cluster, possibly a cluster of hundred or
thousand of machines and
that it knows how to handle a failure.
Further the system should be able
to handling new machines joining or
existing machines leaving the cluster.
Finally, our BDMS must have
data management capabilities.
It should be easy to install, restart and
configure, provide high availability and
make operational management as
simple as possible even when
a BDMS is declined across data centers
that are possibly geographically apart
In a prior module, we discussed
the ACID properties of transactions and
said that BDMSs guarantee them.
For big data systems,
there is too much data and
too many updates from too many users.
So the effort to maintain ACID properties
May lead to a significant
slowdown of the system.
Now, this lead to the idea, that while
the ACID properties are still desirable,
it might be more practical to relax
the ACID conditions and replace them
with what's called the BASE properties,
beginning with Basic availability.
This states that the system
does guarantee the availability
of data in the following sense.
If you make a request,
there will be a response to that request.
But, the response could still
be failure to obtain data or
the data isn't Inconsistent state or
changing state.
Well this is not unusual because
it's much like waiting for
a check to clear a bank account.
Second, there is a soft state.
Which means the state of the system
is very likely to change over time.
So even during times without input,
there may be changes going on through
the system due to eventual consistency.
Thus the state of
the system is always soft.
And finally there's eventual consistency.
This means that the system will
eventually become consistent
once it stops receiving input.
When it stops receiving input,
the data will propagate to everywhere
that it should sooner or later go to but
in reality the system will
continue to receive input.
And it's not checking the consistency
of every transaction at every moment
because there's still lots
of transactions to process.
So, if you make a new Facebook post,
your friend in Zambia, who is supposed
to see your update but is served by a very
different data center in a different
geographic region, will certainly
see it but may not see right away.
Now for those of you who have a bit
of computer science background,
we just want to mention in passing that
there is actually some theoretical results
behind this relaxation.
The result comes from what's
called the CAP Theorem.
Also named Bauer's theorem after
the computer scientist Eric Bauer.
He states, that it is impossible for
a distributed computer system
to simultaneously provide all
three of the following guarantees.
Consistency.
It means all nodes see the
same data at any time.
Availability, which is a guarantee
that every request receives a response
about whether it succeeded or failed.
And Partition Tolerance.
Which means the system
continues to operate
despite arbitrary partitioning
due to network failures.
Now, most of the big data systems
available today will adhere
to these BASE properties,
although several modern systems
do offer the stricter ACID properties,
or at least several of them.
Now given the idealistic background
of what is desirable and
achievable in a big data system,
today's marketplace for
big data related products
looks somewhat like this.
Now this is Matt Turk's depiction of big
data products from a couple of years back.
You would notice that the products
are grouped into categories, like no SQL,
massively parallel databases, analytic
systems, real time systems, and so forth.
In this lesson, we'll do a quick
tour through a few of these products
from different areas of this landscape.
In each case our goal will to be assess
what aspects of our ideal BDMS they cover,
and whether they have obvious limitations.
Now we will not cover all features
of every system, but will highlight
those aspects of the system that
are relevant to our discussion on BDMS.